---
topic: Responsive Design and Dark Mode

presentation: x
material:

---

### The thing with the different screens

In the world we live in right now, it is normal that everyone has at least a computer and a smartphone. Many have even additionally a tablet! The problem with this fact is for us web-developers / web-designers that our website should work with every screen size.

This is the part where _responsive_ websites take their place. What does it mean: _responsive_? Responsive means the websites responds to the screen / device size, it automatically knows how to fit in there. That means widths adjust themselves and things should be arranged in a different position maybe. Most important thing about that is, that we should not have to write whole new websites for each device but write one intelligent so it fits for all of them.
You could try it out with _this_ website! It will fit regardless which device you use.

{% include lazyload.html image_src="responsive.svg" class="invertIfDark" image_alt="responsive design" %}

### Tricks to do so

Fortunately some tricks in HTML and CSS allow us to do this (more or less) automatically. As you know, we can define widths and heights and all the other things that need values for distances with the unit **px**. But why would we have to define it if there would not be an other one? Exactly! There are other ones! For this responsive design thing the other unit **%** is the key. (There are other units as well, but I suppose you will not need them.)

The _%_ unit refers to the width of the parent layer. That means if you have one box with a width of `1000px` and within this box another one with a width of `90%` it will have the final width of 900px.

With this unit you can adjust columns regardless of the width of your window. You could always have a column with the width of `50%` and therefore two columns next to each other.

### Min and max

O.K., now we come to the fun part. You of course got familiar with the commands `width` and `height`. These commands are fundamental, but they are absolute! Even if you say you want your `#wrapper` always be 95% of the overall window, at some point it might be too big! (Just think of a widescreen television with a width of 1920px.)

Again CSS offers us a very nice opportunity to solve this problem: `min-width` and `max-width`. You can add these two commands into your class or ID without destroying, but helping your actual width. Here is an example:

```css
#wrapper {
	margin: auto;
	width: 90%:
	max-width: 1200px;
}
```

What does this code do? We have our #wrapper and want it to be aligned in the center of our page. Therefore we give him a specific width of 90% and a margin of auto. But we do not want it to get any bigger than 1200px. Now what happens. If the Website is smaller than around 1340px, our #wrapper will have the width of 90% with 5% margin on the left and right. Let's say our window has a width of 1000px than the #wrapper will have a width of 900px and margin left and right of 50px.
Is the window bigger than this, let's say it has a width of 1500px, then our #wrapper will "only" have the width of 1200px, because that is the maximum width, even though 90% of our window would be 1350px.

### @media

That are nice things to have while designing websites for every device. But what happens if we have three columns but only an iPhone screen with 300px of width? Will those columns not get really really small? Yes they will! But there is a way to prevent the browser to do so.

In our .css file we can add a simple line of code that allows us to specify different values for different screen sizes. In these parts of our file we can then redefine all classes, IDs and elements and change specific values that we need to change:

```css
@media handheld, only screen and (max-width: 719px) {
	/* Change values over here */
}
```

This line of code to add or change the values in the code below while used on a handheld device (smartphone) or on a usual screen smaller than 720px. If your using device does not fulfill those queries, then the code in between the brackets will not be added.

Of course you can have multiple of the @media queries all with different screen sizes, but then again you would have to write all the time whole new .css files. So use the other commands smartly!

### Ah wow, that seems like a lot of work

Yes it is! To get a good responsive website you need to have a lot of classes that can interact with each other. Again luckily there had been already some developers ahead of us and there are multiple **grids** that you can use. I chose this very [simple grid](http://thisisdallas.github.io/Simple-Grid/).

Now the question occurs: what does such a grid do? A very common way to design websites is using the _twelve column grid_. Think of a table with twelve columns. In some rows you use the first six cells and combine them to one and the same with the second six. In other rows you use all twelve as one cell. Again in others you use every single of those twelve separately. But you always somehow use all twelve columns!

{% include lazyload.html image_src="grid.svg" image_alt="grid" subtitle="The green boxes display the table cells, the grey columns show the twelve table columns" %}

How do we get a use out of this? The _grid.css_ files, that are developed by some very very nice people, have a lot of classes especially for all those situations. You build your boxes and add classes to them like "one third" or similar and declare thus that this box has the one third of the width of the parent box, a different way of saying "four cells of the table row".
Benefit of this method is you can easily design your website in _Adobe Indesign_ for example and then code the basis structure very fast.

Using the grid I mentioned before a simple layout could look like this:

To understand better how those columns should be used, check out the website of this grid. There everything is explained and shown very understandable.

But try it yourself! Download and implement the _grid.css_ of the link before and try to build a responsive website your own! Maybe you could design a use of the system before on a paper just to know what you want to do.
