---
topic: The Box Model

presentation: x
material: lesson_04

---

### Just simple boxes

With [lesson 1](#lesson-01) you got to know basic HTML and with lesson 2 and 3 you got the basic and most important commands in CSS. Mostly everything you need to know to build websites by your own.

But why does it not look like usual websites? What is missing? To understand that we have to look at how websites are built.

You may have noticed that every object in the last examples and exercises are very rectangular, especially regarding the CSS code, e.g. `width, height, margin-left, padding-right`, all the commands specify only the four main directions like a rectangle.

If you have a look at other websites you will realize, that every website is made entirely out of these rectangular shapes or **boxes**.

### Organizing our drawer

Okay, but what is so special about those _"boxes"_ now? Actually nothing, you just have to get used to the way to layout with them. You always have to put a box inside a box inside a box to get the specific layout you want to have. E.g. you have a big box, your website, and inside of that box you have another where the _head_ of your website is located, let's say the intro image and name of your site. After that you have another box, your actual content, inside which are two more boxes, one with your _article_ maybe and next to it is one containing your _navigation_. In your actual content box are some other boxes, some with images, some with maybe other articles. And so on and so on...

{% include lazyload.html image_src="website_boxes.svg" image_alt="box model" subtitle="this is how a website is built up" class="invertIfDark" %}

This sounds a bit confusing, but Think of it maybe as a large drawer you have and you want to organize it. You put in some big boxes to organize your stuff, let's say for your writing material, and you put in smaller boxes, e.g. for paperclips, in those boxes to give them even more structure.

### The div layer

Your question will now maybe: How can I build those boxes? You did it all the time! Every HTML tag builds a box. But all of them have a specific purpose. You know the `<p></p>` tag for example is for writing a paragraph. But is there something for an _empty box_? And of course there is!
This special tag is the `<div></div>` element. The div is mostly nothing except an empty box.

And this is the part where the classes come into the spotlight. To give those div layers a purpose you can give them specific classes and parameters to declare their function for your website. E.g. you could have a div layer with the class _"main"_ in which you describe the values for your main content area. The same you could do for a _navigation_ and the actual _content_.

Now you write the "boxes" into each other like you want to arrange them. Clasp the boxes you want to contain with the tags of the box you want it to be contained, like the HTML-tags of a paragraph clasp the Text of your paragraph.

```html
<div class="main">

    <div class="navigation">

        <ul>
            <li>
                <a href="/home.html">
                    Home
                </a>
            </li>
            <li>
                <a href="/about.html">
                    About
                </a>
            </li>
            <li>
                <a href="/work.html">
                    Work
                </a>
            </li>
        </ul>
    </div>
    <div class="content">
        <h2>
            The headline of my amazing content.
        </h2>
        <!-- Some content -->
    </div>
</div>
```

While styling always look at the very next div layer and how to deal with its content or parent layer. Remember what you practiced with the classic text boxes.

### Floating

Now you probably have set up some boxes, tried some things out with them, arranged them a bit and want to get them next to each other. But you do not find a way! CSS has therefore a specific command: **float**.

Instead of seeing every box for the complete width of the containing layer, boxes who have the `float: left;` CSS property are now aligning next to each other directly. This is a good method to get two columns for example.

**Be careful!** After you are done using boxes that need the float parameter, you have to clear the command again, because otherwise your layout will get destroyed. To clear out the floating again there is another CSS command to do so: `clear: both;`. Usually you build a class (often named "clear") that does this and put it into an empty div layer right after your floating boxes.

This is how a two column code could look like:

```css
/* CSS file */
.two_columns {
	width: 600px;
}
.column {
	width: 280px;
	margin: 10px;
	background: #1ABC9C;
	color: #FFFFFF;
	float: left;
}
.clear {
	clear: both;
}
```


```html
<div class="two_columns">

    <div class="column">
        The first column.
    </div>

    <div class="column">
        The second column.
    </div>

</div>
```

This looks probably a bit disturbing, but with pracitce you will realize how it works and what the pros and cons are from using _floating_.

### The hashtag

One more thing regarding HTML and CSS is using IDs. Basically IDs work exactly the same way as classes do, the only thing that is different is that it is called _ID_.

But while classes are used for multiple elements an ID should only be used for **only one specific** element. E.g. you have multiple div-layers that are used as real visible boxes, but one of those is used as your header element and therefore you want to give it the special ID: _"header"_.

Like the classes overwrite the information from the usual HTML tags, an ID even overwrites the informations given from the classes. That is the hierarchy you browser reads out the information in CSS:

1.  ID
2.  Classes
3.  Actual HTML element
4.  Parent element

### How do I add values to those IDs?

Like I said it is basically like classes, except that you do not use a `.` but a `#` instead. This is how it could look like in your code:

```html
<div id="header">
    My website's header.
</div>
```

```css
/* CSS file */
#header {
	background: #bdc3c7;
}
```

### Those annoying CSS presets

What you probably have realized is that every HTML tag has already some style values. Thus you have some margins or font-sizes where you do not want them and you need to figure out at first where which values are given.

To get rid of those presets you can simply add a .css file that just resets all those pre given values and you can (really) start from scratch! Of course some people did this as well so you do not have to write this file by yourself. Simply download this reset.css file [here](http://cssreset.com/scripts/eric-meyer-reset-css/) and implement it in between your `<head></head>` tags. But be careful to put it before your regular file, otherwise your styles will be overwritten by the reset file!
