---
topic: More About CSS

presentation: ×
material: lesson_03

---

### Is that all to know about CSS?

Now you ask yourself maybe "is that all to know about CSS? But how do I do those fancy boxes and spacings between everything?". Of course not! There is way more about CSS!  
Every Element can be given informations about their sizes and background colors as well. As you may have guessed, the commands therefore are not that difficult to understand. For the background you simply write **background** and the color you want it to have. The sizes are defined with **width** and **height**. An example for a paragraph would look like this:

```css
p {
	width: 500px;
	height: 300px;
	background: #1ABC9C;
}
```

### Those confusing spacings...

More difficult to understand is the thing about the spacing between elements. In CSS you have two very important commands: **margin** and **padding**. 
 
_Margin_ describes the distance to other elements. You could say it would be like something "hey, paragraph, I want you to keep `50px` away from me!". It is somehow like an invisible space-holder.  

_Padding_ however is a bit more tricky. It is the distance between the object and the next, whilst padding adds space to the inner part of the object. It could be imagined as some kind of protection wall the tag builds for itself.



##### This is how **margin** works.  
It creates an invisible placeholder around the element.

##### This is how **padding** works.  
It adds up some space to the element.


Now the question is probably when do you actually need which one? And that is a good question! In some cases it really does not make any difference, but you should always think of what target do you want to achieve. Often you even need both in one element!  
If you just want to put a bit of spacing between two elements, I would recommend to use **margin**. If you have, e.g., a blue text-box and want to have some more blue space between the text and the border of the element, then you definitely need **padding**!  
In the beginning the difference between these seems a bit odd, but with time and practice in using those two you will get familiar with it and recognize the respective pros and cons.

```css
p {
	/* This value will be added to every side. */
	padding: 30px;	
	/* While this one is only for one specific side. */
	margin-bottom: 50px;
	/* The sides are bottom, top, left and right. */
}
```

If you want to have something horizontally centered it has to have a set `width`. Using this width, the browser can calculate the space between the outer borders, left and right, using the command `margin: auto;`.

### Classes

Okay, we have set a page with multiple paragraphs and it looks really nice. But now we want to set a new paragraph with an other color but there are no HTML tags left! So what now?  

This is where **classes** come in very handy. Classes are some kind of variable you can create by yourself. So what does this mean? Let's say you have three paragraphs, all with a specific color, but the last one you want to have in a different colour to let it pop out a bit more.  

So what do we need to create such a class? Actually we just need to tell the browser, that the HTML tag _has_ a class. Therefore we write `class=""` inside of the brackets of the tag we want to add the class and write in between the quotation marks the name of our class, e.g. _ourClass_. This it how this would look like in the .html file for our given example:

```html
<p>
        The first paragraph with some information.
</p>
<p>
        The second paragraph with some information as well.
</p>
<p class="ourClass">
        The third paragraph with really **important** information!
</p>
```

But to define how our new class would look like, we have to give it some values in our .css file of course. To do this we simply write the name of our class into the file and declare the states we want it to have, like we are used to it with all the other html tags, the only thing that has changed, that we put a simple _dot_ before the name of the class, so the browser knows that we want to declare a class in this line. That means we type `.ourClass` into the .css file. For our example again the .css file could look like this:

```css
p {
	background: #64d9c1;
	padding: 20px;
	margin-bottom: 20px;
	color: #FFFFFF;
}
.ourClass {
	background: #1abc9c;
}
```

What will happen now? Every paragraph in our .html file will get all the CSS info we declared for it, but our third paragraph will get some extra information from _ourClass_. If (like in our case) the information would be declared twice within the .css file, e.g. the `background` information in the usual `p` tag and `.ourClass`, then the infromation from the class has a higher priority and will overwrite the information you gave to the usual tags.  

This is how the code above would look like:

<div class="demo">
    <p>
        The first paragraph with some information.
    </p>
    <p>
        The second paragraph with some information as well.
    </p>
    <p class="ourClass">
        The third paragraph with really **important** information!
    </p>
</div>

### This annoying text editor...

Now you should be familiar with writing and understanding HTML and CSS code. You probably have realized, that writing everything in the text editor is really annoying. Luckily a couple of other programmers have thought so as well! 
 
There are a couple of programs, that make it a lot easier to write .html and .css (and a lot of other) files. One of the most common and simplest ones is _Sublime_. I propose you should [download it here](https://www.sublimetext.com/) (it is free) and thank those developers that they made coding for us so much easier! With text highlighting and suggestions what you want to write, building websites gets a lot faster. But see yourself!