---
topic: Introduction in CSS

presentation:  ×
material: lesson_02

---

### The Cascading Style Sheet

Now that we know how basic html looks like and set up a content, we can now focus on changing a bit of the design. Like in every text editing software you are familiar with, we can change e.g. the text color, the font or the line height. All these informations are very basic and that is how we give it to the browser.
  
But first of all, we should have a look at how coding in CSS looks like. The following part is a bit of code you should now be familiar with:

```html
	This is a random paragraph, written in HTML. 
```

Coding in CSS refers to the commands you already know from HTML. That is how the browser knows which properties you want to give to which part of your content. E.g. we want to have the _paragraph_ in a green font, with a size of 28px and written in a serif font, the code would look like this:

```css
p {
	color: #1ABC9C;
	font-size: 28px;
	font-family: Georgia, serif;
}
```

The result of this code would look like this:

This is a random paragraph, written in HTML.

As you can see, the code is really simple. Mostly you write what you want to show and type in the value what you want this command to have.

### What are the typical commands to use?

What you have seen before are basic informations used in CSS. Because of the medium web, we think mostly in pixel. What was `pt` for fonts usually works, but get used of this `px` unit.  

Every command we have in CSS as multiple values we can put in, e.g. you can have your text aligned left, centered or right. You have to know them, but usually you can figure out most of them. If not, don't hesitate to google commands you are missing.  

Like I said before, writing CSS is pretty much like using your text editing software like Word or Pages. You describe how you want your content to look like. Therefore it is important to describe the usual informations. If you want to apply them to all of your content, you usually add this information to your body tag, where all your visible content is shown:

```css
body {
	font-family: Verdana, Geneva, sans-serif;
	font-size: 18px;
	line-height: 24px;
	text-align: left;
	color: #222222;
}
```

If you want to apply a special style to just a specific type of command instead of all your website, than you just chose this HTML tag instead. E.g. you want all your website like written in the code before but just the _headlines type 2_ pop out a bit with some bigger font, underline and a different color:

```css
h2 {
	font-size: 32px;
	line-height: 38px;
	text-decoration: underline;
	font-style: italic;
	color: #e67e22;
}
```

The style of the body tag applies to all of the content, to the h2 tags too, but the information for the h2 overwrites (only) the already given informations from the body tag.

### What is that strange thing with the #?

You have multiple ways to define colors in CSS. You should be aware of, that of course we are on a computer, so our colour range is in _rgb_.  
There are multiple ways to show colors in rgb. The most common way is using the _hex value_, the one with the _#_. Other ways are writing colors (but only the very basic ones, like "red". You can have a look at those [here](http://www.w3schools.com/colors/colors_names.asp)) or using a "real" rgb value. Here is an example of all the different spellings to get **this** green:

```css
p {
	/* wordy (not the perfect colour) */
	color: MediumAquaMarine;
	/* hex value */
	color: #1ABC9C;
	/* rgb value */
	color: rgb(26,188,156);
}
```

As you may have guessed, commenting in a .css file looks a bit different than in HTML. Here you use `/* a slash and a star */` to comment.

Now that you have seen the different types of writing colors, you probably wonder what the letters in the hex code mean. Each letter defines a number between 1 and 16\. _0_ is logically the lowest and _F_ (because of a lack of digits) is the highest. That means the value range goes like this: _0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F_.  

Each pair of letters define a color: The first two letters are the value for red, the second two for green and the last two for blue. E.g. the value _#000000_ is black, _#FFFFFF_ white and _#FF0000_ describes a 100% **red**.

But try it yourself! Click on the hex value below and type in some other values to see how the color of the box changes:

<div id="colorpicker" class="d50"><span class="hashtag">#</span><input type="text" id="hex" maxlength="6" value="1ABC9C"> <label for="hex"></label></div>

Usually you don't have to bother thinking about how the hex values, you just copy them from Photoshop or choose a color from some websites like [ColorPicker](http://www.colorpicker.com/) or [Adobe Color CC](https://color.adobe.com/).

### But where do I write this code?

Remember the head section in the .html file? Now this part gets important! The CSS code is important for the browser to know what it should do, but not for the user to look at.  
There are multiple ways to implement a style sheet, but the cleanest way is to put it in a different document, then it is easier for you to keep your order. Therefore you just build a new document with the ending _.css_. In this file you can instantly write the CSS data you want to have.  
Now you have to tell your website to actually use this file. In between the `<head></head>` tags you have to put this specific line to implement your .css file into your site:

```html
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">
```