---
topic: Introduction in CSS

presentation: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PIoX9QT4Xqm2X-P_OVP9qtDJiIV_ts0Ioyi9ltVWteo/edit?usp=sharing
material: lesson_02

---

### The Cascading Style Sheet

Now that we know how basic HTML looks like and set up some content, we can now focus on changing a bit of the design. Like in every text editing software you are familiar with, we can change the text color, the font, or the line-height. 
  
But first of all, we should have a look at how coding in CSS looks like. The following part is a bit of code you should now be familiar with:

```html
<p>
	This is a random paragraph written in HTML. 
</p>
```

Coding in CSS refers to the tags you already know from HTML. That is how the browser knows which properties you want to give to which part of your content. E.g., we want to have the _paragraph_ in a green font, with a size of 28px and written in a serif font. The CSS code would look like this:

```css
p {
	color: #1ABC9C;
	font-size: 28px;
	font-family: Georgia, serif;
}
```

The result of this code would look like this:

<div class=”demo”>
<p style=”color: #1ABC9C; font-size: 28px; font-family: Georgia, serif;”>
This is a random paragraph, written in HTML.
</p>
</div>

As you can see, the code is straightforward. The properties are mostly self-explanatory, then you simply add the value you intend for your tags to have.

### What are the usual properties to use?

What you have seen before are basic properties and values used in CSS. Because of the medium web, we think mostly of pixels. What was `pt` for fonts usually works, but get used to the `px` unit.  

Every property we use in CSS has multiple values we can put in, e.g., you can have your text aligned _left_, _centered_, or _right_. You have to know them, but no worries, usually you can figure out most of them. If not, don't hesitate to google the elements you are missing.

Like I said before, writing CSS is pretty much like using your text editing software like “Word” or “Pages.” You describe how you want your content to look like. 

### 

As you know now that HTML tags clutch one another, you often have tags that wrap other tags. We can make use of this architecture in CSS as well. The “C” in CSS stands for cascading, implying that values go from top to bottom. Elements that are nested in other elements inherit the properties of their _parent_. E.g., if you set the text color of a paragraph to “red”, the bold text pieces in it will also be rendered _red_ unless you specify otherwise.

The `<body>` tag wraps our entire content. Hence, you can set your website’s overall style here, e.g., the general `font-family`. All HTML elements within your website will then inherit these values.

```css
body {
	font-family: Verdana, Geneva, sans-serif;
	font-size: 18px;
	line-height: 24px;
	text-align: left;
	color: #222222;
}
```

If you want to apply a special style to just a specific type of command instead of all your website, than you just chose this HTML tag instead. E.g. you want all your website like written in the code before but just the _headlines type 2_ pop out a bit with some bigger font, underline and a different color:

```css
h2 {
	font-size: 32px;
	line-height: 38px;
	text-decoration: underline;
	font-style: italic;
	color: #e67e22;
}
```

The body tag style applies to all of the content, so to the `<h2>` tags too. When styling the `<h2>` tag, the properties get added or overwrite the inherited ones. Everything else gets inherited from the parent elements, as usual.

### What is that strange thing with the `#`?

You have multiple ways to define colors in CSS. You should be aware that we are on a computer, so our color range is in _rgb_.  

There are multiple ways to show colors in rgb. The most common way is using the _hex value_, the one with the _#_. Other ways are writing colors as words (but only the very basic ones, like "red"[^1]) or using a "real" rgb value. Here is an example of all the different spellings to get **this**{: .colorExampleDemo} green:

```css
p {
	/* wordy (not the perfect color) */
	color: MediumAquaMarine;
	/* hex value */
	color: #1ABC9C;
	/* rgb value */
	color: rgb(26,188,156);
	/* hsl value */
	color: hsl(168,76,42);
}
```

As you may have guessed, commenting in a `.css` file looks a bit different than in HTML. Here you use `/* a slash and a star */` to comment.

Now that you have seen the different writing of colors, you probably wonder what the letters in the hex code mean. Each letter defines a number between `1` and `16`. `0` is logically the lowest while `F` (because of a lack of digits) is the highest. That means the value range goes like this: `0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F`.  

Each pair of letters defines a color: The first two letters are the value for red, the second two for green, and the last two for blue. E.g,. the value `#000000` is black, `#FFFFFF` white, and `#FF0000` describes a 100% **red**.

But try it yourself! Change the hex value below to see how the color of the box changes:

{% include demo_colorPicker.html %}

Usually, you don't have to bother thinking about how the hex values. You just copy them from your design tool, like “Figma” or “Photoshop,” or choose a color from some websites like [ColorPicker](http://www.colorpicker.com/) or [Adobe Color](https://color.adobe.com/).

### But where do I write this code?

Remember the head section in the `.html` file? Now, this part gets important! The CSS code is essential for the browser to know what it should do but not meant for the user to see.  

There are multiple ways to implement a style sheet, but the cleanest way is to put it in a different document, then it is easier for you to keep your order. Therefore you just create a new file with the ending `.css` in the same directory as your `.html` file. In this file, you can instantly write the CSS code you want to have.
  
Now you have to tell your website to actually use this style-sheet. In between the `<head></head>` tags you have to put this specific line to implement your `.css` file into your site:

```html
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">
```

[^1]: You can have a look at more color words [here](http://www.w3schools.com/colors/colors_names.asp).
