---
topic: Responsive Design and Dark Mode

presentation: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1h_U-8Qb9VYP-M3_2X3YmOkCXl7Bt6fRkuqIniN0FOYI/edit?usp=sharing

---

### The thing with the different screens

In the world we live in right now, it is expected that everyone has at least a computer and a smartphone. Many have even a tablet on top! The problem with this fact is that web developers and designers should work with every screen size.

This is the part where _responsive_ websites take their place. What does it mean: _responsive_? Responsive means the website responds to the screen/device size—it automatically adapts to the screen. That means widths adjust themselves, and things should be arranged in a different position, maybe. 

We should not have to write whole new websites for each device but write it intelligently so it fits all of them. You could try it out with _this_ website! It will fit regardless of which device you access it.

{% include lazyload.html image_src="responsive.svg" class="invertIfDark" image_alt="responsive design" %}

### Tricks to do so

Fortunately, some HTML and CSS tricks allow us to do this more or less automatically. As you know, we can define widths and heights and all the other things that need values for distances with the unit `px`. But why would we have to define it if there would not be another unit? Exactly! There are other ones! For this responsive design thing, other units are relevant. 

The `%` unit refers to the width of the parent layer. That means if you have one box with a width of `1000px` and within this box, another one with a width of `90%`, it will have the final width of 900px. With this unit, you can adjust columns regardless of the width of your window. You could always have a column with the width of `50%` and therefore two columns next to each other.

Here is a list of important units:

|`px`|one pixel|
|`em`|the current size of the component’s text|
|`rem`|the root size of the website’s text|
|`%`|percent of the parent component|
|`vw`|”viewport width,” so the width of your window|
|`vh`|”viewport height,” so the height of your window|


### `min` and `max`

O.K., now we come to the fun part. You, of course, got familiar with the properties `width` and `height`. These properties are fundamental, but they are absolute! Even if you say you want your `#wrapper` always be `95%` of the overall window, at some point, it might be too big! Just think of a full HD screen with a width of `1920px`.

Again CSS offers us a very nice opportunity to solve this problem: `min-width` and `max-width`. You can add these two commands into your class or ID without destroying, but helping your actual width. Here is an example:

```css
#wrapper {
	margin: auto;
	width: 90%:
	max-width: 1200px;
}
```

What does this code do? We have our `#wrapper` and want it to be aligned in our page’s center. Therefore we give it a specific width of `90%` and a margin of `auto` margin. But we do not want it to get any bigger than `1200px`. Now, what happens. If the Website is smaller than around `1340px`, our `#wrapper` will have a `90%` width with a `5%` `margin` on the left and right. Let's say our window has a width of `1000px`, then the `#wrapper` will have a width of `900px` and `margin` left and right of `50px`.

Is the window wider than this—let's say it has a width of `1500px`—then our `#wrapper` will "only" have the width of `1200px`, because that is the maximum width, even though `90%` of our window would be `1350px`. 

The same principle applies, of course, also for `max-height`.

### `calc()`

`calc()` allows you to use simple calculations of values, even if they do not belong to the same unit category. Here is an example:

```css
#wrapper {
	width: calc( 100vw - 60px );
	margin: 60px auto;
}
```


### The media query

Those are nice things to have while designing websites for every device. But what happens if we have three columns but only an iPhone screen with `375px` of width? Will those columns not get really, really small? Yes, they will! But there is a way to prevent the browser from doing so.

In our CSS file, we can add a simple section of code that allows us to specify different screen sizes. In these parts of our file, we can then redefine all classes, IDs, and elements and change specific values that we need to change:

```css
@media only screen and (max-width: 719px) {
	/* Change values over here */
}
```

This code snippet adds or changes CSS properties while a screen is smaller than `720px`. If your using device does not fulfill those queries, then code between the brackets will not be added.

Of course, you can have multiple of the `@media` queries, all with different screen sizes, but then again, you would have to write all the time whole new CSS files. So use the other commands smartly!


### Dark Mode and Variables

Using the media query, we can read the device’s width but also the user’s preference for a light or dark mode. The query looks like this:

```css
@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
	/* dark mode values go over here */
}
```

This can also be similarly annoying to change all the elements’ colors accordingly, so the last trick I am going to give you at hand is the use of variables. In CSS, you can use variables like this: `var(--color-background)`. However, you still need to define them. To do so, add the variables into the `:root` selector. When using the variables, you only need to change the color for the different modes once. Here is an example of such a CSS file:

```css
:root {
	--color-background: #FFF;
	--color-text: #333;
}

body {
	background: var(--color-background);
	color: var(--color-text);
}

@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
	:root {
		--color-background: #222;
		--color-text: #EEE;
	}
}
```