---
topic: More About CSS

presentation: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/10Nsg7NXk_VHTDfgfFqLpZeT5jJy6klCNhievULFRinw/edit?usp=sharing
material: lesson_03

---

### Is that all to know about CSS?

Now you maybe ask yourself: "Is that all to know about CSS? But how do I do those fancy boxes and spacings between everything?" Of course not! There is way more about CSS!  
Every element can be given informations about their sizes and background colors as well. As you may have guessed, the commands, therefore, are not that difficult to understand. For the background, you simply write `background` and the color you want it to have. The sizes are defined with `width` and `height`. An example for a paragraph would look like this:

```css
p {
	width: 500px;
	height: 300px;
	background: #1ABC9C;
}
```

### Those confusing spacings...

More difficult to understand is the thing about the spacing between elements. In CSS, you have two essential commands: `margin` and `padding`. 
 
`Margin` describes the distance to other elements. It’s something like: "hey, paragraph, I want you to keep `50px` away from me!" It is somehow like an invisible space-holder.  

`Padding`, however, is a bit more tricky. `Margin` is the distance between the object and the next, whilst `padding` adds space to the object’s inner part. It could be imagined as some kind of protection wall the tag builds for itself.

{% include demo_marginAndPadding.html %}

Now the question is, when do you need which one? Often, it does not make any difference, but you should always think of what you want to achieve. Multiple times you even need both in one element!

If you just want to put a bit of spacing between two elements, I would recommend using `margin`. If you have, e.g., a blue text-box and wish to have some more blue space between the text and the border of the element, you need `padding`.
  
In the beginning, the difference between these seems a bit odd, but with time and practice in using those two, you will get familiar with it and recognize the respective pros and cons.

```css
p {
	/* This value will be added to every side. */
	padding: 30px;	
	/* While this one is only for one specific side. */
	margin-bottom: 50px;
	/* You can also write all four individually into one property. */
	margin: 10px 20px 50px 10px;
	/* The sides are top, right, bottom, and left. */
}
```

If you want to have something automatically horizontally centered, it has to have a set `width`. The browser then can calculate the space between the outer borders—left and right—using the command `margin: auto;`.

### Classes

Okay, we have set a page with multiple paragraphs, and it looks like we wanted to. But now we want to create a new paragraph with another color, but there are no HTML tags left. So what now?  

Here, **classes** come in very handy. Classes are some kind of variable you can create by yourself. So what does this mean? Let's say you have three paragraphs, all with a specific color, but the last one you want to have in a different color, so it pops out a little more.  

What do we need to create such a class? Actually, we just need to tell the browser that the HTML tag _has_ a class. Therefore we write `class=""` inside of the brackets of the tag we want to add the class and write in between the quotation marks the name of our class, e.g., “ourClass”. Here is how this would look like in the `.html` file for our example:

```html
<p>
	The first paragraph with some information.
</p>
<p>
	The second paragraph with some information as well.
</p>
<p class="ourClass">
	The third paragraph with really <b>important</b> information!
</p>
```

So far, nothing has changed. The third paragraph simply got a new class attribute. To define how our new class should look like, we have to give it some values in our `.css` file, of course. To do this, we simply write our class’s name into the file and declare the properties we want it to have like we are used to it with all the other HTML tags. The only thing that has changed is that we put a simple _dot_ before the class’s name, so the browser knows that we want to declare a class in this line. That means we type `.ourClass` into the `.css` file. For our example, again, the CSS file would look like this:

```css
p {
	background: #64d9c1;
	padding: 20px;
	margin-bottom: 20px;
	color: #FFFFFF;
}
.ourClass {
	background: #1abc9c;
}
```

What will happen now? Every paragraph in our HTML file will get all the CSS info we declared for it, but our third paragraph will get some additional information from `.ourClass`. Suppose (like in our case) the information is declared twice within the CSS file, e.g., the `background` property in the usual `p` tag and `.ourClass`. In that case, the class’s information has a higher priority and will overwrite the information you gave to the usual tags.  

Here is how the code above would look like:

{% include demo_classes.html %}

### This annoying text editor...

Now you should be familiar with writing and understanding HTML and CSS code. You probably have realized that writing everything in the standard text editor is quite annoying. Luckily a couple of other programmers have thought so too! 
 
There are a couple of programs that make it a lot easier to write HTML, CSS, and many other coding languages. One of the most common and simplest ones is _Sublime_. I propose you should [download it here](https://www.sublimetext.com/) and thank those developers that they made coding for us so much easier! With text highlighting and suggestions on what you want to write, building websites gets a lot faster. But try it out yourself!